In this activity, we will use KNIME to
perform data exploration of weather data.
First, we will create
a new KNIME workflow.
We'll then input the weather data.
Next, we will create
a histogram of air temperature.
Create a scatter plot
between two variables.
Create a bar chart to show the
distribution of a categorical variable.
And finally, create a box plot to
compare two different distributions.
Let's begin.
First, we will create
a new workflow in KNIME.
To do this we go to the File menu.
Select new, select new KNIME workflow and
click on next.
Then we type the name of
the workflow we want to create.
We'll call this one plots.
Click on finish.
Next we want to load
weather data into KNIME.
To do this we'll use a file reader node.
To add this node,
go to the bottom left node repository.
And in the box type in file reader.
Drag File Reader to the canvas.
Next, double click on File Reader to
configure it with the weather data.
Click on the Browse button.
We'll choose the weather file.
That's daily_weather.csv.
We can see preview of
the data at the bottom half
of the file reader configure dialog.
You can see values for
each column in the CSV file.
Click OK to close the dialog.
Next, we want to create
a histogram of air temperature.
We'll add the histogram
node to the workflow.
Again, we go to the node repository and
type in histogram.
We'll drag and
drop histogram to the workflow and
we'll connect File Reader to histogram.
We'll click and
hold on output to File Reader and
drag to the input of histogram and
release.
Before we configure the histogram node,
we need to run the file reader node.
We can do that by selecting
the file reader and
either clicking on the green
arrow at the top or
right clicking and choosing execute here.
Once we've done that,
double-click on histogram.
We'll select error_temp_9AM
as the biding column and
also add error_temp_9AM to
the aggregation column.
We'll leave the default
number of bins as ten.
Click on OK.
Now we'll run the workflow.
You can click on the two arrow green
button at the top to run all the nodes.
Now let's view the histogram.
Right click on the histogram node.
And choose View, Histogram View.
The x-axis shows the value for
each bin in the histogram.
And the y-axis is the count, or frequency.
We can see the most frequent
values are between 60 and 73.
On the right, we also see that
there's some with missing values.
Next close the window.
Now let's create a scatter plot to show
the relationship between two variables.
First, we will add the scatter
plot node to the work flow.
We'll connect the the output of
File Reader to the input of Scatter Plot.
Execute the workflow, right-click on
Scatter Plot and choose View Scatter Plot.
We'll click on the Column Selection and
choose air_temp_9am for the X Column.
And for the Y Column,
choose relative humidity 9 AM.
In this plot,
we can see a negative correlation
between temperature and humidity.
As the temperature increases,
the humidity goes down.
We'll close this window.
Next, we'll create a bar chart to show the
distribution of a categorical variable.
We'll visualize the wind
direction at 9 AM.
We will begin by creating the categorical
variable by using the numeric binner node.
Let's add numeric binner to the work flow.
We'll connect the output of file
reader to the input of numeric binner.
Double-click on Numeric Binner
to configure it.
Select max_wind_direction_9am and
click on add five times to add five bins.
Now let's give a name for
each of these bins.
Select a bin and now choose a name.
The first will be for the North direction.
So we'll call that 1-N.
Next, 2-E for East, 3-S for
South, 4-W for West and
finally 1-N for north again.
Now we need to specify the values for
each of these bins.
We'll select the first one and
set the endpoint to be 45 degrees.
Next, choose east and
set that maximum to be 135.
Select the third one and
choose the max to be 225.
Finally, select the fourth one and
select the max to be 315.
Next, click on a pin new column.
Set the name for categorical variable to
be categorical underscore max underscore.
Wind_direction_9AM.
Click OK.
Now add a histogram note to the work flow.
Connect the output of
Numeric Binner to histogram.
Double-click on Histogram to configure it.
Make sure they binning column is
categorical_max_wind_direction_9AM.
And also there are no aggregation columns.
Click OK and execute the work flow.
Let's view the chart.
Right click on Histogram and
choose View, Histogram View.
This tells us that most of the wind
comes from the east and the south.
And not many measurements from the north.
Next, close this.
Now lets create a box plot to
compare two different distributions.
We w'll examine the distribution,
air pressure for
low humidity days versus normal or
high humidity days.
To do this, we'll first need to creat
a categorical variable for humidity.
Lets add another numeric
binner actor to the workflow.
Connect the output,
a file reader to this actor.
Double click to configure.
Select relative humidity, 9 AM.
And click on add twice to add two bins.
Select the first bin and
we'll call that humidity_low.
Select the second bin and
we'll call that humidity_not_low.
Select the first bin, and
we'll set the maximum value to 25.
Check append new column.
And set the name to low_humidity_day,
click on OK.
Next, add the conditional box
plot node to the workflow.
Right click on conditional
box plot to configure it.
Make sure the nominal column
is low_humidity_day and
the numeric column is air_pressure_9am.
Click OK.
Run the workflow.
Right click on conditional box plot and
choose few additional box plot.
And the x axis, we see the two values or
a categorical variable, humidity low and
humidity not low.
The y axis shows the air pressure values.
I can see that on average,
lower humidity means higher air pressure.
Close this.
Finally, save the workflow when
we're done by clicking on the disk
at the top left of the toolbar.